Biological evolution, cultural evolution and decision-making essentially describe the same phenomenon: how information changes in a process of selection, mutation and differential propagation. Recombination (e.g. by sex, multiple role models, group discussion) turns information transfer into a collective endeavour, but individual and group interests may conflict. I will study this tension in biological and sociological information transfer along three themes: **Group selection**, **recombination**, and **mechanisms and costs**.  

# Work program 
**Group selection**: Genetic evolution is selfish and only traits that are beneficial for the genotype (including one’s kin) are expected to evolve. This differs from collective decision-making, where only the (group) outcome matters, and from cultural evolution, where selection pressure applies to both the individual and the group level. I will develop models of multi-level selection to explain cooperation along a gradient from selfishness (as in evolution) to altruism (as in decision-making), or from individual to group-level selection. The gradient of infor-mation transfer systems includes e.g. (sorted from selfish to altruistic): self-pollination, host-symbiont relation-ships, cultural evolution, opportunism in political discussions, scientific publishing and decision-making in social insects. We will test our theory empirically (e.g. by experimental evolution) on various of these examples.

**Recombination**: Cultural evolution and collective decision-making assume that information is merged from multiple agents. “Multi-parental” inheritance has no equivalent in evolution, so some basic concepts (e.g. sexual selection, conflict, dominance) may play out very differently. Nevertheless, recombination increases diversity in all systems and hence provides a long term advantage for species resilience, learning and decision-making, but can also impose a short term cost (outbreeding depression, stereotyping or dissent) in addition to the cost of reduced individual information transmission (“cost of sex”, compromises). I suggest that “population” structure (meta-populations, mentoring models, committees) determines local diversity, and hence the “diversity cost” of cooperation. We will incorporate within-group diversity structure in our model, and additionally engineer spatially structured n-person prisoner’s dilemmas to test how sub-group diversity affects altruistic decisions.

**Mechanisms and costs**: A single agent may transmit one or multiple bits of information (e.g. offspring). These contributions may be immutable (genetic or environmental canalization), react to environmental input (learning, intelligence, phenotypic plasticity), or vary randomly from one another (diversified bet-hedging, creativity). Regardless of the mode, information transmission can impose costs beyond the aforementioned “cost of sex” and “diversity costs”: sexual recombination induces costs of searching for mates, time costs of meiosis, and genetic slippage; learning (like phenotypic plasticity in general) causes costs of information acquisition, maintenance costs (large brain) and genetic costs; and collaboration leads to networking costs, information overload and groupthink. To establish a robust framework on costs of information transfer, we will synthesize costs of phenotypic plasticity, sexual recombination and collaboration. We will then combine these with costs of canalization and of adaptive variance in information transmission. In addition to qualitative and quantitative reviews, we will measure costs of information transfer and their effect on cooperation empirically. 

# Teaching and outreach
My project deals with costs of intelligence, creativity, diversity and dissent, and my teaching reflects this focus. The challenges of intellectually “gifted” individuals, such as perfectionism, motivation problems or deficiencies in organized learning are increasingly recognized in school education, but not yet in university settings. I will hence collaborate with secondary schools, education scientists and gifted societies to improve the learning environment for gifted but underchallenged or underachieving students at university. This includes exchange on best teaching practice, but also outreach and research (e.g. surveys).



# Details on theoretical approaches
## 1) Group selection
Multi-level selection theories state that selection can occur both on the individual and on the group level. For example, individual-level selection in the gut microbiome may be counteracted by group-level selection on the host (Vliet & Doebeli, 2019): although individual-level selection favours “selfish” traits in bacteria, hosts that happen to contain more altruistic strains may fare better, leading to the spread of altruism despite individual-level selection against it. This form of group selection can, however, only work if symbionts are transmitted vertically, and if the generation time of the host is not much longer than that of the symbiont. More generally, the extinction dynamics on the population level are often on a much longer time scale than the generation time of the individual (e.g. Stebbins, 1957; Wright, Kalisz & Slotte, 2013), making the evolution of altruism unlikely in most biological systems.

In contrast to genetic evolution, cultural evolution theories readily adopt group selection as important component of information transmission (Richerson et al., 2016). Learning is subject to various biases (such as conformist bias), leading to high homogeneity within groups and little (horizontal) exchange among groups. Moreover, the ratio of individual to group generation times is lower. Hence traditions can “evolve” even if they incur costs to the individual.

I propose that multi-level selection theory is also applicable to decision-making. The ratio between individual and group timing is much lower (potentially lower than 1), so a positive group outcome is more important than individual contributions to the decision-making process. Consider, for example, political decisions early in the Covid-19 pandemic: politicians of all factions reached consensus on highly unpopular strategies, such as the closing of schools and non-essential business. Decisions had nearly immediate effects, thus opportunistic behaviour (opposing measures to gain votes) would be unlikely to succeed. In this scenario the generation time of individual careers (one election cycle, 4 years) is much longer than the generation time of the decisions (few weeks to months). Political scenarios with a longer generation time (e.g. climate change), on the other hand, invite for opportunism, because there are multiple individual generations (election cycles) before negative (group) outcomes appear. Such a situation is similar to the evolution of selfing, which on the long term increases extinction risk of a population, but nevertheless evolves, because it provides an immediate transmission advantage. Hence I think that it should be possible to develop a common multi-level selection theory for all forms of information transfer. 

## 2) Recombination
While I think that multi-level selection theory is applicable for decision-making, it is not yet clear how it applies for collective decision-making. 

Multi-level selection theory has been developed as alternative to kin selection, which explains altruism as investment in the fitness of close relatives. Despite mathematical equality between kin selection and multi-level selection (Lehtonen, 2016), the concept of group selection remains contentious. Accordingly, studies applying multi-level selection frequently use systems without recombination, so that kin selection can be ruled out.  This choice is obviously not suited to describe collective actions such as decision-making or learning from multiple role models, were information is merged among multiple partners. In fact, recombination of information among more than two sexual partners (multi-parental inheritance) is nearly non-existent in biology (but see Bloomfield et al., 2019), despite the many forms of sexual recombination that can evolve (Aanen, Beekman & Kokko, 2016), so this form of recombination is so far uncharted territory. 

In order to extend evolutionary theory to information transfer systems with group recombination, some key concepts need to be re-evaluated. One of them is the paradox of sex, i.e. the question why cooperation should evolve despite immediate short-term losses. Sexual recombination dilutes the amount of information that is transmitted to one’s offspring, to the benefit of a partner that may not invest with equal resources. When extended to group recombination, the “paradox of recombination” is escalated further, as are the related concepts of sexual (or social) conflict and sexual selection (selection of group members). In a similar vein, offspring inherit two unequal sets of information, and one of them may be dominant over the other; when there are multiple such sets, more complex hierarchies and leadership patterns than simple dominance may occur.

Recombination has another disadvantage in addition to the cost of sex: when genetically distant individuals recombine, their offspring can suffer outbreeding depression. Recombination can, for example, break down genetic linkage between coadapted gene complexes, or lead to intermediate phenotypes that are less adapted than either extreme. This cost of genetic diversity depends, however, on the population structure. A meta-population consisting of multiple smaller populations may be genetically diverse, yet outbreeding depression is avoided, as all individuals only mate with genetically similar genotypes. The situation is obviously more complex when recombination occurs among multiple “genotypes” with potentially asymmetric contribution, but in general, committees or mentoring models may have a similar effect on the exchange of ideas as meta-populations: they reduce local diversity while maintaining global diversity, and hence lower the costs of recombination when the collective is diverse.  A multi-level selection model for decision-making needs to take these complexities of recombination into account. This includes both intra-individual conflict of ideas, and inter-individual diversity of opinions.
 

## 3) Mechanisms, costs and limits of information transmission
When organisms reproduce, they must make decisions under uncertainty. At the time of reproduction the future state of the offspring’ environment is undetermined, but it may correlate to some degree with the parent’s conditions. Similarly, traditions and learned techniques may become obsolete when the natural or social environment changes, and decisions and ideas need to reflect changing criteria. 

Several strategies for information transmission are known in biology: 1) canalization is the invariant expression of one phenotype, regardless of environmental state; 2) phenotypic plasticity describes a strategy in which phenotype expression depends on an environmental cue; 3) diversified bet-hedging describes the investment in multiple different phenotypes; 4) conservative bet-hedging describes the investment in a single “safe” phenotype. I have recently placed these strategies into a common framework and explained them along a continuum of reaction norm shapes (Joschinski & Bonte, 2020). I think there are enough similarities between genetic evolution, cultural evolution and decision-making to warrant a generalization to other forms of information transfer, for example, genetic and environmental canalization are conceptually similar to static views and stereotypes, phenotypic plasticity to intelligence, and diversified bet-hedging to mutational hot spots, trial-and error learning (Truskanov & Prat, 2018) and creativity.

Because no organism is infinitely plastic, there must be some costs and limits of plasticity. These costs and limits have been classified into multiple categories, such as costs of information acquisition, maintenance costs (like those of a large brain or eyes), or genetic costs (more complex genomes are prone to epistasis and pleiotropy).  I argue that similar reasoning should apply to bet-hedging and other strategies. Thus, I am currently expanding the framework on costs and limits of plasticity to those of bet-hedging strategies, arithmetic mean maximization and canalization. I have searched the Web of Science database for costs, constraints or limits of bet-hedging, plasticity and canalization, and found nearly 5000 search results, but more than 4300 of these deal only with plasticity. Concentrating on review and modelling papers, I currently review the costs and limits of bet-hedging and canalization that are described to date, and integrate them in an individual-based model. The work could be expanded by a meta-analysis on the data papers to evaluate the empirical evidence for the theoretical cost and limit categories.

The framework of costs and limits of phenotypic plasticity deals with the environment-dependent vertical transmission of information. Assuming that genetic evolution, plasticity and decision-making share similar mechanisms, one may also propose a cost of recombination and a cost of collaboration. Indeed, several costs of reproduction (beyond the “cost of sex” and outbreeding depression) have been described (Lehtonen, Jennions & Kokko, 2012). First, sexual recombination requires a mate. Mate limitation is a common problem in small populations, and even if a population hosts enough mates, these have to be found, assessed and potentially fought over. Secondly, meiosis requires much more time than mitosis. In small unicellular organisms, meiosis might be a time-limiting step that constrains generation times. Thirdly, sexually recombined offspring usually suffer an immediate loss of fitness, because recombination breaks up co-adapted gene complexes and creates epistasis (genetic slippage). These costs resemble those of plasticity, as they also include environment-dependent costs of information acquisition (in this case a mate), environment-independent maintenance costs (meiosis), and a cost that scales with population diversity (epistasis). Collaboration can likewise induce a cost of finding and understanding someone else’s standpoint (information acquisition), maintaining a social network (maintenance), and cognitive dissonance or group think (diversity). I hence think that these costs could be generalized to “costs of information transfer”.  
Taken together, the timing of individual and group selection; the benefits of diversity and the costs of information dilution (“costs of sex”); the population sub-structure; and the costs of information transfer should jointly predict the emergence of cooperation. 


# Practical approaches
The work program is currently under development and will depend on the interest of collaboration partners. I attached a few research ideas on the next pages.

## 1) Scientific publication networks
Science is a decision-making process. Modern publication databases archive communication in highly organized manner, including any information exchange among individual contributions (citation networks). While we do work towards a common goal, i.e. increasing human knowledge, current publishing and hiring practices also impose pressure to be selfish. One may hence expect an intermediate level between selfishness and selfless cooperation in publication behavior. 

I will use Dawkin’s concept of memetics as heuristic to explain the evolution of scientific information. Following Kuhn et al. (2014), I define a meme as the name for a scientific concept, e.g. “intelligence”. Once created, the name of a meme remains constant, but the concept it encompasses may evolve, just like genes that may acquire new functions. For example, the definition of “intelligence” may refer to multiple uncorrelated abilities (Gardners concept of multiple intelligences), two traits (“crystalline” and “fluid” intelligence), or a general intelligence factor (g-Factor). The frequency of these different presentations of a meme is comparable to the allele frequency of a gene. Scientific memes are embedded in publications, so a publication can be regarded as the analogue of a phenotype; its content is a “memotype” that consists of multiple connected memes. When publications are cited, memotypes recombine and memes propagate, thus citations are a measure of “meme flow”. Importantly, the “mortality” (retraction rate) of publications is extremely low, so fitness can be simply defined as citations a memotype receives (including the citation success of the “offspring” publications). In other words, the fitness of a memotype is entirely determined by its attractiveness for citation and the only selection pressure occurring is sexual selection. The research environment (current state of knowledge, available research tools, political factors) influences the attractiveness of a publication throughout its life time, but the currently most important factor is the micro-environment in which a publication is “born” (i.e. the journal). Thus, pre-publication peer review plays a major role in determining fitness of a memotype.

There are some interesting differences to standard evolutionary theory that make publications interesting “study organisms”. First, the mode of reproduction resembles multi-parental inheritance, as publications propagate by rearranging information from multiple sources. Secondly, publications are written by authors whose “academic fitness” is tightly coupled with publication fitness (e.g. h-index), similar to meta-organisms (e.g. host-endosymbiont relationships) in which the interacting species differ in generation times and selective pressures. Thirdly, publication databases such as the Web of Knowledge offer much more detailed information about information flow (“meme flow”) than is typically collected from biological populations (“gene flow”). I hence find the publication database a suitable system to test the validity of the models.

## 2) Biological study systems
Questions, methods and study systems strongly depend on the cooperation partners. Here are a few examples:
### a)	Group selection
We could subject an organism to a periodic extinction threat (every few generations), and test whether it leads to the evolution of altruism. This would require an organism with reasonably fast generation times and an environment that changes cyclically. The evolution of altruism should depend on the cycle length of the environment, as predicted by the multi-level selection models.

An alternative approach would be the sampling of natural populations that differ in extinction cycle lengths. For example, multivoltine species usually produce more generations per year at southern latitudes than at northern latitudes. Traits like aggregation behaviour could be selected against over summer, but prove beneficial for the group in winter, and I expect these traits to evolve only in northern latitudes where the ratio of individual- to group selection cycles is low. Another example would be the comparison of populations that differ in meta-population dynamics (fast vs slow local extinction), e.g. species that live in forest clearings in fast- vs slow-growing forests, or in temporary ponds with fast or slow drying cycles. Traits that protect the local population from overgrowth (or dessication), but are costly in individuals, should only have evolved in the fast-cycling environments. Lastly, one may compare the evolution of altruistic traits on the species level, e.g. in endosymbionts living in short-lived vs fast-lived organisms.

Specific ideas and model organisms: 
-	Arabidopsis lyrata has populations that are self-incompatible and outcrossing, but also populations where selfing is common. I expect that the probability of selfing is negatively correlated with environmental variance, because variable climates will more frequently impose group selection pressure on outcrossing. Advantages: well-understood system. Disadvantages: lack of novelty; annual life cycle, experimental evolution takes long 
-	A bacterium could be genetically engineered to produce a costly (e.g. slightly toxic) but useless protein. Every n generations the population protein level could determine population survival. Advantages: fast; disadvantages: entirely artificial 
-	Daphnia, as well as aphids, are multivoltine and facultatively parthenogenetic. Both species could be used for experimental evolution or comparative experiments. Advantages: fast growth, common, well-researched; Disadvantages: not sure which trait to look at 

### b)	Multi-parental inheritance
The only known biological system with multi-parental inheritance is Dyctiostelium (Bloomfield et al., 2019), and even there the third parent only contributes mitochondria. Nevertheless, studies of dominance, sexual conflict etc. in Dyctiostelium would fit into this research proposal.
### c)	Costs of information transfer
I can think of two research questions: quantifying the costs of information transfer, and studying how they affect the evolution of altruism. The costs of information transfer can be further classified along multiple dimensions: costs of information acquisition (learning) and maintenance (brain); costs of plasticity (learning a single item) and bet-hedging (learning multiple items at once); costs of recalling (memory) and adapting (animal analogues of intelligence and creativity); and costs of receiving (learning) and submitting (teaching). Most research so far concentrates on the energetic costs of maintaining a large brain.

An obvious model system to study the various costs of information transmission is the honey bee; however, it is not an optimal system to study the evolution of altruism, as the individuals that learn (workers) have no capacity for reproduction (i.e. selection only occurs on the group level). Hence a comparison of learning costs and mechanisms with other hymenopterans (e.g. prosocial halictids; multigynous ants) may be needed.


### 3)	Sociological study systems
This is the least developed part of the proposal. I have neither experience nor knowledge of sociology/social psychology and need to read a textbook or two before continuing here. 

In general I think that prisoner’s dilemmas are a promising method to study the emergence of cooperation. In these game theoretical settings two prisoners are given the choice to denounce the other(s) for a partial relief in punishment, but the punishment is even lower if both stay silent. The extensions to multiple individuals (n-person prisoner’s dilemma) and repeated interaction (iterated prisoner’s dilemma) describe cooperation in a group context. A less common application is the spatially explicit prisoner’s dilemma, in which one’s own strategy depends on the mean strategy of the nearest neighbours.

The prisoner’s dilemma only describes the interaction among individual agents, while the payoff structure of the choices is kept constant. I think the evolution of cooperation in variable environments could be better approximated if the benefits and costs of each strategy would fluctuate in space and time. A temporally autocorrelated payoff structure, for example, should lead to meta-populations that vary in their investment into cooperation. Extending this idea to n-person dilemmas would allow adding unequal weights (dominance), which may enhance our understanding of decision-making under rapidly changing conditions.

I think the prisoners dilemma could also be extended to a multi-level selection problem: Each prisoner receives several chances to reap smaller benefits by defecting, and the group outcome is only calculated after a few rounds. This scenario can also be iterated multiple or infinite times. The information about individual choices might be either announced, remain concealed until the group outcome is known, or stay entirely hidden. Depending on the parameters (generation time and information concealment), different strategies of cheating, punishing or cartel-forming should arise.
The dilemmas could be solved by individual-based models and verified by human players.

# Teaching
My proposal deals, in part, with the costs of information transmission, in particular the costs of phenotypic plasticity, diversity and dissent. These individual-level challenges of plasticity and diversity are also relevant for my teaching. Highly intelligent (i.e., phenotypically plastic) individuals are called “gifted”, but despite its positive connotation and the value society places on high intelligence, being “gifted” comes with substantial challenges (e.g. Webb, 1993), such as: social isolation; perfectionism and the impostor syndrome; motivation problems and deficiencies in organized learning; and difficulties with or defiance of authorities.

The realisation that gifted children and adolescents face “psychological damage and permanent impairment”(Marland, 1972), on par with those of other children with special needs, led to nation-wide programs for gifted education in the USA and elsewhere. These programs should support the social and emotional well-being of the children, while also boosting their academic achievement and competence (Worrell et al., 2019). Gifted education has officially become a priority in Germany since 2009 (Herrmann & Nevo, 2011); however, the focus here is frequently confined to academic achievement. Acceleration (grade-skipping) and summer academies/competitions accordingly are quite common, while continued enrichment programs are mostly lacking. While existing measures undoubtedly reduce the potential damage of standard school curricula, many gifted children nevertheless received no or inadequate help. After years of potentially inappropriate schooling, these people may enrol at university.

Apart from the obvious challenge of bringing organizational, learning and motivational deficits  into an environment that requires organized, self-directed learning, gifted students may face further difficulties: they may be particularly vulnerable to the big-fish-little-pond effect (Marsh & Hau, 2003); leaving the school setting means a major disruption of the social support network, which tends to be thinner for gifted people (Cross, 2015); and expectations regarding the difficulty and depth of the curriculum may not be met in the first semesters (Miller & Dumford, 2018). Specialized programs (“honors” programs) are, however, rare in the German higher education system (Wolfensberger, 2015). Furthermore, they serve only a minority of the students (generally the high achievers), but many STEM students likely classify as “gifted”. We thus need to bring gifted education to our regular teaching. I plan the following measures:
1)	I will acquire professional training in gifted education and implement it in regular teaching. This focus needs not come at the cost of other groups, as student-centered teaching benefits all; in fact, best teaching practices for highly talented students (creating community, enhancing critical thinking and offering freedom)  are not too different from general best teaching practices.
2)	I am seeking collaborations ,  to raise awareness and review the state of gifted education in STEM. We also plan to conduct quantitative research on the prevalence, attrition risk and structural barriers that gifted and creative students face in STEM. 
3)	I plan to survey  the challenges that parents of gifted children in academia face, and how the challenges affect scientific careers.
4)	I will strengthen collaborations between the university and gifted societies , schools with tracks for gifted children , and research on talent development, so that attrition of gifted students in the first semesters is reduced. 


See also repository "intelligence", in particular https://github.com/JensJoschi/intelligence/raw/master/blog_post.md .  


# References
Aanen D, Beekman M, Kokko H. 2016. Weird sex: the underappreciated diversity of sexual reproduction. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 371:20160262. DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0262.

Bloomfield G, Paschke P, Okamoto M, Stevens TJ, Urushihara H. 2019. Triparental inheritance in Dictyostelium. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116:2187–2192. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1814425116.

Cross J. 2015. Gifted Children and Peer Relationships. In: Social and emotional development of gifted children. Prufrock Press, 41–54.

Herrmann  prof A, Nevo PDB. 2011. Gifted Education in German-Speaking Countries. Gifted and Talented International 26:47–62. DOI: 10.1080/15332276.2011.11673588.

Joschinski J, Bonte D. 2020. Transgenerational Plasticity and Bet-Hedging: A Framework for Reaction Norm Evolution. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution 8. DOI: 10.3389/fevo.2020.517183.

Kuhn T, Perc M, Helbing D. 2014. Inheritance Patterns in Citation Networks Reveal Scientific Memes. Physical Review X 4:041036. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevX.4.041036.

Lehtonen J. 2016. Multilevel Selection in Kin Selection Language. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 31:752–762. DOI: 10.1016/j.tree.2016.07.006.

Lehtonen J, Jennions MD, Kokko H. 2012. The many costs of sex. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 27:172–178. DOI: 10.1016/j.tree.2011.09.016.

Marland SP jr. 1972. Education of the Gifted and Talented: Report to the Congress of the United States by the U.S. Commissioner of Education and Background Papers Submitted to the U.S. Office of Education ["Marland report"]. Washington, DC. https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/003210303.

Marsh HW, Hau K-T. 2003. Big-fish-little-pond effect on academic self-concept. A cross-cultural (26-country) test of the negative effects of academically selective schools. The American Psychologist 58:364–376. DOI: 10.1037/0003-066x.58.5.364.

Miller AL, Dumford AD. 2018. Do High-Achieving Students Benefit From Honors College Participation? A Look at Student Engagement for First-Year Students and Seniors. Journal for the Education of the Gifted 41:217–241. DOI: 10.1177/0162353218781753.

Richerson P, Baldini R, Bell AV, Demps K, Frost K, Hillis V, Mathew S, Newton EK, Naar N, Newson L, Ross C, Smaldino PE, Waring TM, Zefferman M. 2016. Cultural group selection plays an essential role in explaining human cooperation: A sketch of the evidence. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 39. DOI: 10.1017/S0140525X1400106X.

Stebbins GL. 1957. Self Fertilization and Population Variability in the Higher Plants. The American Naturalist 91:337–354. DOI: 10.1086/281999.

Truskanov N, Prat Y. 2018. Cultural transmission in an ever-changing world: trial-and-error copying may be more robust than precise imitation. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 373:20170050. DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2017.0050.

Vliet S van, Doebeli M. 2019. The role of multilevel selection in host microbiome evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116:20591–20597. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1909790116.

Webb JT. 1993. Nurturing social-emotional development of gifted children. In: International handbook of research and development of giftedness and talent. Elmsford, NY, US: Pergamon Press, 525–538.

Wolfensberger MVC. 2015. Talent Development in European Higher Education: Honors programs in the Benelux, Nordic and German-speaking countries. Springer International Publishing. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-12919-8.

Worrell FC, Subotnik RF, Olszewski-Kubilius P, Dixson DD. 2019. Gifted Students. Annual Review of Psychology 70:551–576. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-psych-010418-102846.

Wright SI, Kalisz S, Slotte T. 2013. Evolutionary consequences of self-fertilization in plants. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 280:20130133. DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2013.0133.


